Stretching from the eastern tips
of Oman over the Arabian Peninsula,
across the Nile and along the northern edge of
the Sahara Desert, the Arab World has many facets,
but none are quite as grand and awe-inspiring
as the towering mountains of the Maghreb,
the western most region of the Arab World.
Several Mountain ranges stretch from Southern
Morocco to the Tunisian Capital Tunis, which
are grouped under the term the Atlas Mountains.
Across these 2300 kilometers, twice the
length of the alps, Northern Africa rises
from the Sahara Desert before it plummets again
towards the Mediterranean Coast, covering many
unique landscapes, climates and ecoregions.
In this video we will have a closer look into
the constituting parts of this massive region,
starting our journey in southern Morocco,
at the foothills of the Atlases oldest
mountains, the Anti-Atlas Mountain Range.
As a disclaimer, some geographers exclude
these mountains from the greater Atlas Range
due to its different origin story,
but for the sake of completeness,
we will have a quick look at it anyways. The
Anti-Atlas, also known as the lesser Atlas,
is significantly older than its northern
continuation. Around 250 million years ago, when
the North America continental shelf was combined
with the African landmass as part of Pangea, the
Alleghanian orogeny has formed a massive mountain
range along the intersection, creating what is today
known as the Appalachians in North America and
the Atlas mountains of Morocco. The rest
of the Atlas mountains are instead the product of
the African plate subducting under the Eurasian
landmass starting around 66 million years ago,
putting it into a completely different category.
Despite these different backstories, the
Anti-Atlas share many of the characteristics
of the greater Atlas mountains. Surrounded
by the Draa River, Morocco's longest river
at 1100 kilometers, these mountains have
a respectable size despite hundreds of millions
of years of erosion, and the tallest peak, the
Djebel Siroua, which is visible from Marrakesh,
stands at over 3300 meters above the sea level.
As a dormant volcano, it is the last identifiable
volcanic remnant of the orogeny which has
stamped these mountains out of the ground.
Standing in the rain shadow of the
taller High Atlas Mountains to the north,
not much precipitation reaches this
region, and with an annual precipitation
barely reaching 200 mm per year, it
is classified as a hot arid desert,
together with the Sahara Desert
that it borders to the south.
Separated by the Sous and
Dades rivers to the north,
which have carved steep canyons into the
sandy rock, the tallest part of the Atlas
mountains rises up on the other side of the
canyon walls, bringing us the High Atlas.
Widely regarded as the heart of the Atlas range,
this section lies entirely within Morocco as well,
piercing through the country in a
south eastern, north western direction.
Hundreds of parallel ridges are lining up across
its 100 km width, with the narrowest section in
the middle, containing not just the highest peak
of Morocco, but also of The Atlas mountains,
the Maghreb region and North Africa as a whole.
At 4167 meters above sea level, this summit allows
for spectacular views onto the surrounding
ridges and the steppe in the far distance.
This elevation makes the High Atlas
the best winter sport destinations of
Africa with Morocco's largest resort, Oukaïmeden,
receiving an average of 47 snow days in a winter,
rivaling the best resorts of Europe. The snow
cover of the High Atlas is typically quite
extensive, burying nearly the entire
length in a glimmering blanket every year.
The barren landscape around the tallest
summits of the High Atlas are under strict
protection today with a well developed national
park, attracting an ever increasing number of
tourists into the country. Next to Hiking
and skiing, many of the tourists also flock in to
enjoy the pristine star-gazing opportunities,
having turned Morocco into an astrophotography hot-spot
in recent years.
To quantify the clarity of the night sky, the
american amateur astronomer John Bortle has
devised the Bortle scale, which ranks a specific
location on earth by which celestial bodies are
visible with the naked eye. The scale ranges
from inner-city skies where only the moon,
planets and a few of the brightest star
clusters are visible, all the way to class 1,
where globular clusters and otherwise faint
galaxies like the Triangulum Galaxy are clearly
visible with the naked eye. These classifications are
largely based on peripheral light pollution
from surrounding cities and villages but
as we move into more rural areas, nuances
in the larger geography take over as the defining
factors. Mainly humidity and atmospheric particles
are diminishing the view here, so a dry climate
and high elevation can improve the visibility.
The High Atlas mountains excel in both aspects,
leading to a Bortle Scale class 1 and 2 throughout
much of the region. While this isn’t the most
unique, with many very remote locations like
the world's oceans also having class 1, the High
Atlas Mountains have the additional advantage that
they are relatively easy accessible through
various hiking trails, and the proximity to
the equator allows for the observation of both
northern and parts of the southern hemisphere.
The north-south division, with one side
facing the mediterranean climate and the
other facing the Saharan Desert further has a
strong impact on the ecoregion distribution,
with the northern mountain faces receiving
significantly more precipitation than their
Saharan counterparts. Ranging from 600 to
1000 millimeters per year, the northern faces
can support light vegetation and some cedar and
oak trees, while the southern section is closer
to a desert climate with precipitation
only ranging from 200-400 mm per year.
Rising along this northern and more precipitous
slope, the Moulouya River, one of Morocco’s most
important waterways for hydropower generation, is
separating the High Atlas from the Middle Atlas
Mountains. The more mellow elevations and the
absence of a rain shadow make this region the most
fertile stretch and the principal agricultural
region of the Moroccan Atlas. Especially apple
trees, but also the cultivation of olives,
citrus fruits and sugar beets are widespread here.
East of the Moroccan High and Middle Atlas, narrow
flat plains expand to the border with Algeria,
from where two further sections of the
Atlas Mountains start to rise. Running
parallel to the Mediterranean
Coast and the Saharan Desert,
the Tell Atlas in the north and the Saharan
Atlas in the south stretch the full length
of northern Algeria, with a massive bowl
occupying the lowlands in-between them.
While the moist north, for North African standards
at least, houses most of the Algerian population,
the Saharan Atlas is climatically very
similar to the name-giving desert of the
south. Virtually no precipitation reaches
these areas, and the vegetation is barren,
where only scattered palm trees and hardy
shrubs manage to survive in the sandy soils.
This climate does not support
permanent waterways and instead,
many of the rivers which drain the
Saharan Atlas are considered Wadi’s,
a term used for temporary streams in the Arabic
Realm, which only appear during the wet-season.
Flowing northwards, all streams from these
mountains eventually end in the Hautes Plaines,
an elevated basin at 1300 meters in the
west, which gently slopes down to the east.
The plain stretches over 600 kilometers between
the two mountain ranges and the steppe-like bowl
is covered in deep alluvial debris from
the many rivers ending their course here.
During the wet season, large but shallow lakes
form at the lowest parts of the bowl, but without
any drainage to the sea, evaporation from the
intense sunlight quickly turns these into massive
salt flats every year. The two major basins are
the Chott Ech Chergui in the center and the Chott
el Hodna in the east, with these flats
spanning a width of 160 and 77 km respectively.
These basins stand in stark contrast to the
northerly Tell Atlas, which boast the wettest
climate of Northern Africa, with some regions in
the east receiving as much as 1000 mm per
year, which is twice the rainfall experienced
in London. The summers are however quite dry and
long hot months still remind the people that
they are quite close to the Saharan Desert.
To the east, both Atlas ranges gradually
merge into the Aures Mountains, which
occupy the outermost section of the Atlas.
Straddling the Algerian-Tunisian border,
these natural fortifications have
played an incredibly important
part in Algeria's history all the way
from antiquity to the last century.
The first described inhabitants that permanently
settled in the Atlas region are the Berbers,
a group of people whose culture and identity
formed during the Pastoral Neolithic period,
when the Sahara desert was still a
humid plain, around 10500 years ago.
Throughout all of antiquity, these people had
to defend themselves against foreign forces,
and the Aures mountains have been a major
retreat during invasions from the Romans,
Byzantines, Vandals and Arabs that
spread along the North African Coast.
Even in modern times, during the time of
the Algerian War for Independence from
French occupiers between 1954 and 1962,
the Aures Mountains have presented the
fortified base for the Algerian resistance
movement. Guerilla warfare tactics have been
used in the hard to navigate terrain,
where local berbers had the upper hand,
and the French colonial forces struggled
till the end of the war to control this area.
Due to this inaccessibility, economic prospects
have been hard to pursue in recent decades, which
is why the Aures Mountains are falling behind in
today's connected world. Across the Maghreb, it is
the least developed region today, mostly relying
on subsistence agriculture and pastoralism.
Surrounding this mountain range are the many Gulfs
of Tunesia’s coastline with several lakes and
reservoirs occupying the valleys in the hinterland
of the coast. The largest of these is the Chott
el Djerid in the south, which spans 200 by 75
kilometers and occupies a massive shallow
basin. Similar to the lakes in the Hautes Plaines,
low precipitation in the summer bring this lake
to near extinction every year, and its endorheic
geography, meaning that it has no outflows have
turned it into a hypersaline environment. Lying 17
meters below the sea level, all the water draining
from the Aures and Saharan Atlas is trapped just
a few kilometers before the Mediterranean Sea,
and the salt and mineral deposits have
stained the landscape with vivid colors.
Arriving on the easternmost end of
the Atlas Mountains, we are concluding
this journey through the incredible North African
mountains. From the Prehistoric Anti-Atlas
over the snow covered giants of the High Atlas,
along the Mediterranean Coast and Sahara
to the Algerian and Tunisian fortification,
these mountains are a magnificent example
of mother nature's architectural abilities,
and a reminder of how a little geographical
change can transform climates and landscapes.
If you want to learn more about the most
incredible mountain ranges of this planet,
you can check out these videos about the Rocky
Mountains or the Caucasus. And if you want to
support the work I am doing on this channel even
more, you can now also leave a small donation on
my Buy Me a Coffee page with the link in the
middle of the screen or in the description.
See you in the next one, cheers!